README.md, before:

# Dynamic motd

The aim of this project is to give some informations when you log into a server through SSH.

Example:

```

   ___  ___ _ ____   _____ _ __
  / __|/ _ \ '__\ \ / / _ \ '__|
  \__ \  __/ |   \ V /  __/ |
  |___/\___|_|    \_/ \___|_|


  Debian GNU/Linux 12 (bookworm) (kernel 6.1.0-7-amd64)

System information as of Wed Jan 22 15:35:40 2025 on x.x.x.x

System load:  0.07                 Processes:    244
Memory usage: 26%                  Swap usage:   1%

  Mount points          Disk usage        Inodes usage
 /boot                 12%  of 977.3M    0.5% of 65808
 /boot/efi             0%   of 250.1M    Not available
 /                     13%  of 19.6G     5.0% of 1310720
 /home                 1%   of 7.8G      1.3% of 524288
 /var                  43%  of 19.6G     16.6% of 1310720
 /var/log              2%   of 7.8G      0.0% of 524288
 /var/log/audit        0%   of 7.8G      0.0% of 524288
 /var/tmp              0%   of 4.8G      0.0% of 327680

 5 logged in users:
  admin       from x.x.x.x                 at Tue Jan 21 22:43:37 2025

No mail.
Last login: Mon Apr  3 07:28:01 2023 from laptop.example.org
```

**Warning** This is Debian and Debian-related distributions only.

## Installation

### Debian package

Go to <https://framagit.org/luc/dynamic-motd/-/releases/permalink/latest>, download the Debian package and its signature file.

Check the signature of the Debian package and install the package:
```bash
minisign -Vm dynamic-motd_*.deb -P RWRzxrp04vb4Db3sle7Az6kSeCipT1ixRjRZPXdUUQuuwgi9UW81E+dx &&
sudo apt install ./dynamic-motd_*.deb
```

### Manual installation

You need to install some packages:

```
apt-get install figlet lsb-release bc python3-utmp
```

Optionally, you can install `needrestart` which is used to show a message if your server need a reboot (main reason (and the only one I know): you have upgraded your kernel).
If you don't install `needrestart`, it will work, but you won't be warned about the need for a reboot.
`needrestart` warns you about services that need to be restarted too (but is slower than `checkrestart` for that, see below).

You can optionally install `debian-goodies` which provides `checkrestart`, which will be used to warn you about services that need to be restarted. Relying on `needrestart` for that is slow (±7 seconds) while `checkrestart` do it faster (less than one second).

Check out the repo (to a folder of your choice)
```
git clone https://framagit.org/luc/dynamic-motd.git
cd dynamic-motd/
```

Then, as `root`:
```
cp -r update-motd.d/ /etc
rm /etc/motd
ln -s /var/run/motd /etc/motd
```

## Disabling for some users

Just create a `/etc/update-motd.d/hushlogin` file containing the names of the users, like:

```
alice
bob
```

## Salt

You will find a working salt formula in `init.sls`.

```
cd /srv/salt
git clone https://framagit.org/luc/dynamic-motd.git motd
salt your_server state.sls motd
```

## License

GPLv2. Have a look at the [LICENSE file](LICENSE).

## Acknowledments

- Dustin Kirkland, the guy behind the Ubuntu dynamic motd (I took some scripts from Ubuntu and stole inspiration too :D)
- https://github.com/maxis1718/update-motd.d for the skeleton
- https://github.com/jnweiger/landscape-sysinfo-mini for the python script (slightly modified)

Commit message:

Remove --fstab from findmnt call in sysinfo
Initially I used this argument as I work with systems with a lot of bind mounts
and it felt unnecessary to list them all, eg:

  Mount points                         Disk usage       Inodes usage
 /                                   49%  of 19.3G     12.8% of 1299984
 /rw                                 35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /home                               35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /usr/local                          35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /var/spool/cron                     35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /etc/hosts                          35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /var/lib/systemd/timers             35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /var/lib/plocate                    35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /var/lib/containerd                 35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /etc/docker                         35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /var/lib/docker                     35%  of 20.5G     26.3% of 1373568
 /home/user/.emacs.d/elpa            2%   of 3.9G      2.4% of 262144
 /rw/home/user/.emacs.d/elpa         2%   of 3.9G      2.4% of 262144
 /proc/xen                           -    of 0         100.0% of 00

However it seems impossible to filter theses mounts in one call,
(https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/430074/how-to-exclude-bind-mounts-from-findmnt-results-list)
and --fstab is a bad compromise as mounts points may be declared in many others
ways than /etc/fstab.

README.md, after:

# Dynamic motd

The aim of this project is to give some informations when you log into a server through SSH.

Example:

```

   ___  ___ _ ____   _____ _ __
  / __|/ _ \ '__\ \ / / _ \ '__|
  \__ \  __/ |   \ V /  __/ |
  |___/\___|_|    \_/ \___|_|


  Debian GNU/Linux 12 (bookworm) (kernel 6.1.0-7-amd64)

System information as of Wed Jan 22 16:02:47 2025 on x.x.x.x

System load:  0.07                 Processes:    245
Memory usage: 26%                  Swap usage:   1%

  Mount points                        Disk usage        Inodes usage
 /                                   13%  of 19.6G     5.0% of 1310720
 /boot                               12%  of 977.3M    0.5% of 65808
 /var                                43%  of 19.6G     16.6% of 1310720
 /home                               1%   of 7.8G      1.3% of 524288
 /var/log                            2%   of 7.8G      0.0% of 524288
 /var/tmp                            0%   of 4.8G      0.0% of 327680
 /boot/efi                           0%   of 250.1M    Not available
 /var/log/audit                      0%   of 7.8G      0.0% of 524288
 /srv/borg                           0%   of 1.3T      0.0% of 85901312
 /srv/nextcloud                      13%  of 3T        0.0% of 201326592
 /mnt/disquette                      78%  of 1.2T      0.1% of 82378752

  2 logged in users:
  user       from x.x.x.x                   at Tue Jan 21 22:43:37 2025
  user       from x.x.x.x                   at Tue Jan 21 22:43:37 2025

No mail.
Last login: Mon Apr  3 07:28:01 2023 from laptop.example.org
```

**Warning** This is Debian and Debian-related distributions only.

## Installation

### Debian package

Go to <https://framagit.org/luc/dynamic-motd/-/releases/permalink/latest>, download the Debian package and its signature file.

Check the signature of the Debian package and install the package:
```bash
minisign -Vm dynamic-motd_*.deb -P RWRzxrp04vb4Db3sle7Az6kSeCipT1ixRjRZPXdUUQuuwgi9UW81E+dx &&
sudo apt install ./dynamic-motd_*.deb
```

### Manual installation

You need to install some packages:

```
apt-get install figlet lsb-release bc python3-utmp
```

Optionally, you can install `needrestart` which is used to show a message if your server need a reboot (main reason (and the only one I know): you have upgraded your kernel).
If you don't install `needrestart`, it will work, but you won't be warned about the need for a reboot.
`needrestart` warns you about services that need to be restarted too (but is slower than `checkrestart` for that, see below).

You can optionally install `debian-goodies` which provides `checkrestart`, which will be used to warn you about services that need to be restarted. Relying on `needrestart` for that is slow (±7 seconds) while `checkrestart` do it faster (less than one second).

Check out the repo (to a folder of your choice)
```
git clone https://framagit.org/luc/dynamic-motd.git
cd dynamic-motd/
```

Then, as `root`:
```
cp -r update-motd.d/ /etc
rm /etc/motd
ln -s /var/run/motd /etc/motd
```

## Disabling for some users

Just create a `/etc/update-motd.d/hushlogin` file containing the names of the users, like:

```
alice
bob
```

## Salt

You will find a working salt formula in `init.sls`.

```
cd /srv/salt
git clone https://framagit.org/luc/dynamic-motd.git motd
salt your_server state.sls motd
```

## License

GPLv2. Have a look at the [LICENSE file](LICENSE).

## Acknowledments

- Dustin Kirkland, the guy behind the Ubuntu dynamic motd (I took some scripts from Ubuntu and stole inspiration too :D)
- https://github.com/maxis1718/update-motd.d for the skeleton
- https://github.com/jnweiger/landscape-sysinfo-mini for the python script (slightly modified)
